#april #autism #conf #dd #hhs #hse #homework #index #library #personal #publication #revisit #substances #vocation #writing 

---
Author:: April Cyr
Date:: 6/1/2021
Key:: Private

---

When I was a teenager in High School, I was fascinated by drug use. I was a pretty sheltered kid and played a lot of video games as a means to escape my day to day life. As friends of mine at school got into drug use, I was really fascinated and wanted to understand more. Yes, I had gone through Health classes that administered the DARE program, teaching the abstinence model of avoiding all drug use. But I knew there was something more to the story. Because of restrictions in my life, participating in this use with my friends was not possible. But I would become fascinated learning about Psychoactive substances, whether they be legal or illegal, by consuming content on the internet. 

I lost interest in my addictive behaviors to video games after I turned 16 and tried smoking pot. It wasn't the pot, that caused this shift, but getting caught by my parents. Particularly my Mom, who I don't have much of a relationship with at this point in my life, didn't want me to end up like her brothers, and resorted to involving the police, and putting me in a very awful situation where I had to rat (be an informant) to my parents about what friend gave me the pot. I warned the person about the situation, but this caused my friend's to avoid me, and in some ways, make me a target for a little while. So I had to act out to win my friends back. I did start smoking pot every day by my Junior and Senior year, but kept it very stealthy. And in that time, my interests evolved to learning about the social ramifications of Prohibition and why some drugs are deemed okay and others are not. 

Many of the people I knew and cared about got into harder drugs. However, I observed that of this sample size, of the people I know, many that fell into harder addictions also had the foundation of being prescribed drugs that were also abusive to their health. The two most common were Adderall/Vyvanse/Amphetamine leading to illicit speed drugs like Cocaine and Meth, and Opiate medications(Painkillers), often prescribed after traumatic accidents that lead to unimaginable amounts of pain, leading to Heroin and off script pill abuse. 

In my twenties I still had a daily pot smoking habit on and off, and I became very lost for several years. I had gone to University and completed a Bachelors Degree program, but it was also in a College Town that was my first experience of having an accessible landscape and living experience. I have undiagnosed autism, documented through my life as a learning disability. And that is a pervasive life long developmental disability which impacts how I navigate the world. 

When I left Athens after completing my program against my wishes, I didn't resort to drugs, but the only world I knew that worked for me was the world of Activism. My escapism turned into hitchhiking, riding Greyhound buses, and seeking out long distance group walks. I was addicted to the desire to radically change the world, and had a lot of naivete about so. I would travel alone to wherever I was welcomed to visit. I had many friends at this point in my life who were glad to host me on their couch or guest room. I'd make it a point to be a good house guest by washing dishes, and not overstaying my welcome. Still, I ran into some very dangerous situations, and while I am grateful to have those experiences, I would never do it again. 

I had a mentor back in my hometown, who is a Native American Civics Organizer and Two-Sp-rit PHD holder in Immunology. At the time I was on and off homeless and unemployable. They gave me some paid work as a security escort and took me in when I didn't have anywhere else to stay. She has a lot of old-school conservative Indigenous belief systems, and would always tell me that in her Lakota upbringing, substance use of any kind was frowned upon, as it was seen as a mind vortex for bad spirits to enter your life. That politically, drugs, be they legal or illegal, were used to squash marginalized communities who were gaining political traction towards Sovereignty and Self-Determination. That drug users were liabilities to their communities, and that if you wanted to have an out of body experience, you do that best by deprivation and sobriety, like that which is done during a Sundance. Individuals would fast from food and water in the extreme heat for days at a time to get closer to the divine. This is not my cultural upbringing or affiliation, but it was a perspective on drugs I had never experienced or heard before. 

When I moved to North Carolina, it was under pressure of a very bad situation my mother put me in by threatening to involve law enforcement in my life if I didn't respond to her texts. So i left and was homeless in Asheville for several years. I genuinely loved many experiences of this, because I had a vehicle I could sleep in, and was not trapped in a room. I could volunteer every day and eat free meals with all types of people. I said at the time it was a choice for me to be homeless. In hindsight, I didn't want to lose agency and autonomy over my life and decisions. I did not have indoor plumbing for much of that time. I had to put myself in high risk situations, and was exploited a lot. Objectively it wasn't a great situation. 

I had gotten recruited into a training program for people like myself who were high risk, to learn professional culinary skills. It was very difficult to get back into the housing system be that I was out of it for over a decade with no rental history or credit. When I did, it was in another exploitative setting with an individual who used me as a weapon to get ahead as a Chef, and hurt their colleagues. When I left, I lost a lot of my possessions, but had my life and health.

Part of this struggle involved realizing that I had unclocked Autism my entire life, but it was what we understand now to be the Female presenting autism, and not the Male presenting type. Changing my name legally and starting over from scratch as Female had allowed me to start envisioning a life where I didn't need a vice or an escape. And I'm getting there day by day..

I got grandfathered into a housing situation right outside town since 2019. I've had a great rental history in that time, and have been confronting many of the issues that I faced throughout my life that coincided with addiction and substance use. I am excellent at independent living and caring for others and having a place, even as a rental, that is completely safe and that I enjoy being at, is a blessing I don't want to take for granite ever.

Mind-Altering substances can be a force for good or bad. Sometimes drugs are necessary for someone to live their best life, or cope with a situation they cannot change. In my life now I value Sobriety, but keep a positive perspective on Drugs. I'm not on any prescriptions, but I am interested to understand how they work, and the qualitative experiences people who use them have. I would never let my child be prescribed amphetamines for school issues, but I would consider with a doctor mood stabilizers if it helped them live their best life. 

Pharmacology is not black or white. Life has much more nuance. And the best thing I believe anyone can do as an individual is to seek out learning and varied diverse understanding on any given topic. 

