## ## Electroshock Therapy (ECT)

I am what is called an Electrophile. I enjoy getting shocked with low doses of electricity through a safe device for muscle care, skin health, and fun. That said, I control, administer, and consent to electric shock. If someone wants to seek therapeutic Electroshock Therapy for their pervasive Depression, I am all about it, given they can provide Informed Consent about the process. Your body, your choice.   

The United Nations has ruled that coerced Electroconvulsive Therapy/ECT is a form of torture. ECT is used in shady and illegitimate practices as conversion therapy against gay, autistic, and nonverbal people. The market is aimed at parents who want to fix their 'defective' offspring, and it isn’t uncommon that funding comes from religious organizations. It is more common in regressive, politically conservative areas where it is less likely to be reported. The parents consent to the procedure being done, not the individual. The patient is seen to have Diminished Capacity because they are ‘possessed by the devil,’ or something similar. There are many ethical violations with coerced ECT, which is in historical line with  HotCold Shock Treatment, Transobital Lobotomy, and ‘Corrective’ Sex Abuse. Let it be known, however, that ECT as torture is still done in many places in this country as a form of Conversion Therapy.

Anonymous Personal Experience 2015 / ‘16, New York State:  “would b repeadly shocked & havin burns on my wrists & ankles) was so much pain… weekly 1or 2x a week (can’t remember) & it was bad to the paint where i started to hallucinate & onset of Complex PTSD… for me at the time when that was happenin - i described it as bein in electric chair bein made to hold 2 metal beams witch made the Eletric shocks Worse… it was the worst pain I remember & lastly what I remember was the smell of the burns on me feelin brain dead tryin to snap out of the shock flows as i mentally broke down tryin not to yell in pain & supress my emotions & it was traumatic experience at the age of 17 i had to go through…”

Electroconvulsive Therapy in the mainstream has evolved a lot since the 1940s and is often done under sedation. In Australia, it is very easy to refuse this therapy. ECT can be a very effective treatment for Depression. Sometimes pervasive Depression comes from having to hide significant parts of who we are from our family and community. 
